---
layout: blog
title: "Crossovers: The Forgotten Edge"
date: 2020-08-03
categories:
 - minimal skills
 - edges
 - crossovers
---

Having just begun my derby journey I have watched an absurd number of
how-to videos.  In particular, videos explaining how to improve my
crossovers.  As I'm sure is common, I've been working on perfecting
them since day one.  As I've got better, I started to analyze my
crossovers, and really try to pinpoint what makes a good crossover,
and I realized something that I haven't heard before, but once I
realized its importance, my crossovers significantly improved.

Let's assume we're rolling derby direction.  Then the most important
part of a crossover is pulling your left foot -- I like to think of it
as dragging track -- toward your right foot and then under your right
leg.  As this motion happens we pick up our right foot, and extend it
out as far as we can, and then drag it back. We can use this motion to
increase speed without using a significant amount of energy.  Now when
we drag our left foot towards us and it reaches the point of being
just below our torso we are told to push our foot out into a sickled
form; just like Derby Athletics teaches us:

<center><a href="https://youtu.be/YgtPAQG4vII?t=174"><img width="50%" src="/images/posts/Crossovers-Forgotten-Edge/sickled-form.png"></a></center>


I found that just being told this was not enough, I would try some
really weird ways to get my foot like that which didn't result in a
great crossover, but then it hit me!  It's all about the edge!

When we push our skate under us we need to activate our outer edge to
allow our skate to smoothly push under and then out and up into the
sickled form. Using this edge makes the movement more fluid, and it
rectifies a super common complaint of new toestop users.  One thing I
noticed when I was beginning to practice using my toestops a lot more
was if I lowered them down, then they would hit the track when I did
my crossovers.  However, once I started effectively using my outer
edge during crossovers this problem went away!

So in this post I'm going to tell you about some drills I used to get
better at using my outer edge to improve my crossovers, and getting to
know my edges have also helped me in a lot more areas as well.

So, where is this outer edge?  The outer edge is the edge of the skate
where your pinky toe is.  So on the right foot, the outer edge is the
right most edge, but on the left foot, the outer edge is the left most
edge.  Here is a short video of me pressing on my outer edges:

<center><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QhG44dAj3EQ" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

Now let's take a look at a crossover and see if we can see that edge
use.  Take a look at this video of me doing crossovers -- I'm not a
professional so don't be too hard on me:

<center><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Y9OzRLuS2aI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

So as we can see from the video I always push into the outer edge and
then out.  This makes the full motion very fluid.

Now on to the drills!

  1. (Basic Skill) One footed glides; checkout this
     [post](/2020/06/13/Reverse-Glide-Juke.html) for an explanation
     and video.  They will help strength your ability to transition,
     because when you pick on leg up you're effectively gliding.

  2. (Basic Skill) Grapevines are a great way to get used to
     crossovers as well as the outer edge.  As you cross over you will
     pick up your crossing leg, and the leg still on the ground will
     push into the outer edge to help you step over.  This is a great
     way to get used to the motion and learn the feeling of using the
     outer edge.  Here is a video of me doing some:

     <center><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BbRUYeyzqHk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

  3. Combing the grapevine with a little movement makes for a great
     crossover drill that's been really helping me.  You can combine
     it with a plowstop as well to get some extra practice with those
     too.  I'm not sure what to call these, but they have been helping me
     think about my form more and add control to the movement.  Check
     out this clip for the drill:

     <center><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/UpfAtEUKBcM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

  4. The last drill is a lot of fun!  It is a one-footed glide where
     you swerve about on each edge.  It is great for balance work,
     feeling the edges, and learning to move more gracefully and
     agile.  Check it out, and have fun:

     <center><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/cMcv-qVOiA8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

